# Epidemic dynamics modeling analysis

## Summary:

We modeled the epidemic dynamics of viral lineages based on the viral genomic surveillance data deposited in the GISAID database (https://www.gisaid.org/). In the present study, we performed three types of analyses: i) The estimation of the relative Re for lineages related to XBB in India, ii) The estimation of the epidemic frequencies of XBB and BQ.1 lineages in each country as of November 15, 2022, and iii) The estimation of the global and country-specific Re value of XBB and BQ.1 lineages in the countries where these variants circulated. For the three analyses, the metadata of viral sequences downloaded from the GISAID database on December 1st, 2022 was used. We excluded the sequence records with the following features: a lack of collection date information; sampling in animals other than humans; sampling by quarantine; or without the PANGO lineage information.

### i) The estimation of the relative Re for lineages related to XBB in India
To estimate the relative Re for lineages related to XBB in India, we analyzed the records for samples from India from June 1, 2022 to November 15, 2022. We removed records with >5% undetermined (N) nucleotide sequences from the dataset. We first simplified the viral lineage classification based on the PANGO lineage. We renamed the sublineages of BA.5 as BA.5, and subsequently, we removed the BA.5 sequences harboring any of the convergent S substitutions, S:R346X, S:K444X, and S:N460X from our dataset in order to exclude the sequences belonging to the recent BA.5 sublineages exhibiting particularly higher Re such as BQ.1.1. Also, we removed the sequences of BA.2.75 harboring any of the convergent S substitutions, S:R346X, S:K444X, S:N460X, and S:F486X. Furthermore, since a part of BA.2.10.1 sequences harbor XBB-characteristic substitutions (S:V83A, S:F486S, and S:F490S) probably due to the misclassification of XBB, we removed the sequences of BA.2.10.1 harboring these XBB-characteristic substitutions. According to the modified viral lineages, we extracted records for viral lineages of interest: BA.2, BA.5, BA.2.75, BM.1, BM1.1, BM.1.1.1, BA.2.10, BJ.1, XBB, and XBB.1. Subsequently, we counted the daily frequency of each viral lineage. Relative Re value for each viral lineage was estimated according to the Bayesian multinomial logistic model, described in our previous study. Briefly, we estimated the logistic slope parameter $$\beta_l$$ for each viral lineage using the model and then calculated relative Re for each lineage $$r_l$$ as $$r_l=exp\left(\gamma\beta_l\right)$$ where $$\gamma$$ is the average viral generation time (2.1 days) (http://sonorouschocolate.com/covid19/index.php?title=Estimating_Generation_Time_Of_Omicron). Parameter estimation was performed via the MCMC approach implemented in CmdStan v2.30.1 (https://mc-stan.org) with CmdStanr v0.5.3 (https://mc-stan.org/cmdstanr/). Four independent MCMC chains were run with 500 and 1,000 steps in the warmup and sampling iterations, respectively.

### ii) The estimation of the epidemic frequencies of XBB and BQ.1 lineages in each country as of November 15, 2022
To estimate the epidemic frequencies of XBB and BQ.1 lineages in each country as of November 15, 2022, we analyzed the records for viral samples collected from August 1, 2022 to November 15th, 2022. In data for each country, we counted the daily lineage frequency of BQ.1 (including its decedent sublineages), XBB (including its decedent sublineages), and the other SARS-CoV-2 lineages (referred to as “Other lineages”). We analyzed the data only for countries with a total of ≥1000 samples or ≥50 samples of either the BQ.1 or XBB lineages. In this criterion, 56 countries remained. Subsequently, we fitted the multinomial logistic model described in the paragraph above to the daily lineage frequency data of each country separately, and the epidemic frequency of each viral lineage as of November 15, 2022 in each country was estimated. If the data for November 15, 2022 in a particular country are not available, the lineage frequencies at the latest date in the country were used instead. The estimated lineage frequencies for BQ.1 and XBB in each country were shown on the global map using The R library maps v3.4.1 (https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/maps/index.html).

### iii) The estimation of the global and country-specific Re value of XBB and BQ.1 lineages in the countries where these variants circulated.
To estimate the global average and country-specific Re values for BQ.1 and XBB lineages, we analyzed the sequence records for viral samples collected from August 1, 2022 to November 15, 2022. We defined the sequences of BQ.1 (including its sublineages) harboring S:R346T as BQ.1.1 and the other BQ.1 sequences as BQ.1. Similarly, the sequences of XBB (including its sublineages) harboring S:G252V as XBB and the other XBB sequences as XBB. Subsequently, we extracted the sequence records of BQ.1, BQ.1.1, XBB, and XBB.1 in addition to BA.5 (including its sublineages) and BA.2.75 (including its sublineages), which are predominant lineages before the BQ.1 and XBB emergencies. Next, we counted the daily frequency of the lineages above in each country. We analyzed counties with a total of ≥1000 samples and ≥200 samples of either the BQ.1, BQ.1.1, XBB, or XBB.1 lineages. In this criterion, 11 countries (Australia, Austria, Denmark, India, Indonesia, Israel, Malaysia, Peru, Singapore, the UK, and the USA) remained. To estimate the global average Re values of the lineages above, we employed a hierarchal Bayesian multinomial logistic model, which we established in our previous studies. Briefly, this hierarchal model can estimate the global average and country-specific Re values of lineages of interest simultaneously according to the daily lineage frequency data from multiple countries. The relative Re of each viral lineage $$l$$ in each county $$s$$ ($$r_{ls}$$) was calculated according to the country-specific slope parameter, $$\beta_{ls}$$, as $$r_{ls}=exp\left(\gamma\beta_{ls}\right$$) where $$\gamma$$ is the average viral generation time (2.1 days). Similarly, the global average relative Re of each viral lineage was calculated according to the global average slope parameter, $$\beta_l$$, as $$r_l=exp\left(\gamma\beta_l\right)$$. For parameter estimation, the global average intercept and slope parameters of the BA.5 variant were fixed at 0. Consequently, the relative Re of BA.5 was fixed at 1, and those of the other lineages were estimated relative to that of BA.5. Parameter estimation was performed via the MCMC approach implemented in CmdStan v2.30.1 (https://mc-stan.org) with CmdStanr v0.5.3 (https://mc-stan.org/cmdstanr/). Four independent MCMC chains were run with 500 and 2,000 steps in the warmup and sampling iterations, respectively.